On recycling and the nature of the universe

My house has/had a recycling problem. We have two bins, one for plastic, aluminium and paper and one for everything else. Being students we are too busy/lazy to sieve out any ruined recycling bins and so most of the time the recycling bin ends up contaminated and used as general waste. Anyway this seemed like a solveable problem. All of us are pretty environmentally conscious, one of us is doing his PhD in it, so there should probably be a good reason this is happening. The first and most obvious problem was there was no way to determine which bin was the recycling and which was the general bin. This was easily fixable. Someone found some blue paper that nearly matched the colour of the bin, scrawled the word 'Recycling' on it and we stuck it the wall above the bin.

That didn't work at all. For whatever reason it was still easy to put rubbish in with the recycling and once someone did so it became a general purpose bin anyway and the sign was meaningless. So I experimented with a few things. I made the assumption that no one was putting something in the wrong bin intentionally, but people were unconciously choosing the easier option. The original arrangement had the recycling bin nearer to the door and also nearer to the one part of the kitchen that's usually clean enough to cook in. It seems reasonable people would put rubbish in the nearest bin. So I tried swapping them around. This put the label for the recycling was above the general bin but in the recycling bins colour and had no apparent effect. The next iteration I moved the bins back around and then turned them to face inwards so that you couldn't see the entrance of one bin from most of the kitchen. This seemed to work until someone emptied the gone off contents of the fridge into the bin that was facing them from that perspective - the recycling bin. Some iterations later, the current setup has the recycling bin in it's original position facing the general bin and the general bin has the lid removed. The recycling bin is now facing away from you from all useful points in the kitchen and is correctly and clearly labelled. Simultaneously the general bin is the easiest to put things in and as it has no lid we can pile more things in there reducing the chance someone gets lazy and puts something in the wrong bin to save effort. Plus you get to play at stacking as much stuff in the bin as possible which in my opinion is at least as fun as Jenga.

These ideas and the reasoning behind them are a result of a book I read a while back called 'The Design of Everyday Things'. If you've not read it, I recommend picking it up. It does not talk at all about bins. Instead it discusses the design of doors, switches, taps, money, etc and how constraints, affordances and indicators can be used to help people build effective mental models of the devices we want people to interact with. If I had to sum up the lessons in it *very* generally I would say that it teaches you how *to make the wrong thing hard and the right thing easy*.

But this principle goes further than bins and doors and taps. In fact I ripped that title straight from a video discussing the principles of horse training. We teach horses with reinforcement learning which requires them to search for the correct action and they are rewarded for performing the correct action. To make it easier for the horse to find the correct action, we use tools and construct situations that make it easier for them to find the correct action. The same idea can be applied to the field of metaheuristics that I study, wherein we want to design algorithms that can find solutions to optimisation problems. We do this by defining what a good solution looks like and then define solution representations and constraints that are more likely to result in improving solutions and less likely to find poor ones. Economists use the same principle when they define systems of incentives and disincentives that result in certain behaviours.

If we water down the concept a little further we can get to a more general principle. All of these examples so far have assumed there is a 'right' behaviour that we want to incentivise. However evolution and other similar systems don't have a particular goal they just have a selection function - some way of defining what gets to continue existing. This principle is critical in explaining evolution, virology and internet memes. So long as we have some form of variation, a system will optimise for the selection function.

The Pareto principle or the 'law of the vital few', states that in many situations roughly 80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes. For example, in business you might expect that roughly 80% of the sales come from 20% of clients. As a rule I can't imagine it is very exact but it is an interesting idea. The principle of making the wrong thing hard and the right thing easy, doesn't explain all of any of the fields in this post, in fact for most of the fields it should probably have a few large asterisks, but it is a more useful and general principle than most other ideas. For example, principles such as 'all food requires seasoning' or 'use the lightest tension you can when lockpicking' are very important in their field but don't communicate any information outside of them. So it is possible that the Pareto principle also applies to principles in a way and that there are some ideas that are so fundamental that they are common to all fields. 

If there are certain super principles then it may be worthwhile to search for them. The broad idea of evolution via variation and selection seems like it is near bedrock and can cover a lot of fields. Surely, there can't be many more...